source: src-casement-1904
locator: p34
url: https://archive.org/download/CasementReport/CasementReportSmall_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: Casement at Lake Mantumba; the asterisked place-names are the Blue Book's own suppressions

had undoubtedly had an " awful past" at the hands of some of the officials who had
preceded him in the local administration, and that it would take -time for confidence to
be restored. Men, he said, still came to him whose hands had been cut off by the
Government soldiers during those evil days, and he said there were still many victims
of this species of mutilation in the surrounding country. Two cases of the kind
came to my actual notice while I was in the lake. One, a young man, both of whoso
hands had' been beaten off with the butt ends of rifles against a tree, the other a young
lad of 11 or 12 years of age, whose right hand was cut off at the wrist. Tins boy
described the circumstances of his mutilation, and, in answer to my inquiry, said that
although wounded at the time he was perfectly sensible of the severing of his wrist,
but lay still fearing that if he moved he would be killed! In both these cases tM
Government soldiers had been accompanied by white officers whose names were, given
to'me. 'Of sis natives (one a girl, three little boys, one youth, and one old woman)
who. had been mutilated in this way during the rubber regime, all except one were
dead at the date of my visit. The old woman had died at the beginning of this year,
and her .niece described to mo how the act of mutilation in her case. ha{l been
accomplished. The day I left Lake Man turn ba five men whose hands had been cut oft
came 'to the village of T * across the lake to see me, but hearing that I had already
gone away thev returned to their homes. A messenger came in to tell me, and I
sent to T * to find them, but they had then dispersed. Three of them subsequently
returned, but too late for me to see them. These were some of those, I presume,
to whom the official had referred, for they, came from the country in the vicinity ot
P * station. Statements of this character, made both by the two mutilated persons 1
