source: src-bluebook-1918
locator: p59-60
url: https://archive.org/download/b32172266/b32172266_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: Gerard Kamaheke's affidavit; the signature-mark line 'H 4' and the page number are dropped

The chiefs Saul, Joel and I with a number of our followers were camped
in the veld at Ombuyonungondo, about 30 kilos. from Ombakaha. This was
in September. A messenger, a German soldier, came to our camp on horseback. He said he had come from the German commander at Ombakaha,
who had sent him to tell us to come to Ombakaha and make peace. Joel
then sent the schoolmaster Traugott Tjongarero personally to Ombakaha
to confirm the truth of the soldier’s message and to inquire if peace were
intended whether the Herero leaders would be given safe conduct and
protection if they went into Ombakaha. Traugott came back a few days
later and said he had seen the German commander, who had confirmed the
message brought by the soldier. Traugott said that the German commander
had invited us all to come in and make peace; that our lives would all be
spared; that we would be allowed to retain our cattle and other possessions ;
and that we would be allowed to go to Okahandja to live. I fell in with the
wishes of the majority and we left for Ombakaha in the evening, and arrived —
at the German camp at noon the next day. With me were the chiefs Saul
and Joel, and the under-chiefs Traugott, Elephas, Albanus, Johannes Munqunda, Elephas Mumpurua and two others whose names I now forget. We
had with us 70 Herero soldiers. The wives and children we had left at

ourcamp. On arrival at Ombakaha the 70 men who were under my command
were halted near the German camp under some trees, as the sun was hot and
we were very tired. gJoel and the other leaders went on to the German
commander’s eee about 100 yards away; they left their arms -with us.
The Germans then came to me and said we were to hand over our arms. I
said, ‘‘ [ cannot do so until I know that Joel and the other leaders who are
now in the camp have made peace.” I sat there waiting, when suddenly the
Germans opened fire on us. We were nearly surrounded, and my people
tried to make their escape. I tried to fight my way through, but was shot
in the right shoulder and fell to the ground (I show the wound), and I lay
quite still and pretended to be dead. I was covered with blood. The German —
soldiers came along bayoneting the wounded; and as I did not move they

thought I was dead already and left me. The chiefs Saul-and Joel and all
the other headmen were killed. I got up in the night and fled back to our
camp, where I found our women and children still safe and also some survivors
of my 70men. We then fled away further towards the Sandveld and scattered
in all directions.
