source: src-hansard-18931109
locator: p546
url: https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/commons/1893/nov/09/motion-for-adjournment
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the page's HTML rendered to text; runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed
note: the debate heading the site prints, then Labouchere reading Lobengula's letter to the House; section marks dropped

HC Deb 09 November 1893 vol 18 cc543-627
British dominions. On October 15, 1889, Lord Knutsford, on a Petition signed by the two Dukes, Mr. Rhodes, Lord Gifford, and others, granted the Charter, by which the Company were empowered to use and retain the full benefit of concessions so far as they were valid, and to acquire, by concession or agreement, rights and jurisdictions for the purpose of government in the lands referred to, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State. He must now explain how this concession was obtained from Lobengula, for it appeared that he had always absolutely denied that he ever granted it on the terms which appeared on the face of the instrument. When Lobengula was told that he had granted a concession of this nature he sent two Indunas to the Cape, with orders (as could be seen on reference to the Blue Book) to discover, first, whether such a place as England existed; and next, whether, if they discovered that such a place did exist, there was such a person as the Queen of England; and if there was such a place and such a Monarch, they were to lay before her the following letter and to ask her advice on the subject:—
"To Her Majesty Queen Victoria, from Lobengula.
"Some time ago a party of white men came into my country, the principal one appearing to be a man named Rudd. They asked me for a place where they could dig for gold, and said they would give me certain things for the right to do so. I told them to bring it to me, and I would see what I would do. A document was read and presented to me for signature. I asked what it contained, and was told that in it were my words and the words of those men. I put my hand to it. About three months after I heard from other sources I had given the right to all the minerals in my country. I called a meeting of my Indunas and of the white men, and demanded a copy of the document. It was proved to me that I had signed away the right to minerals of the whole country to Rudd and his friends. I have since had a meeting of my Indunas, and they will not recognise the paper, as it contains neither my words nor the words of those who got it from me."
