source: src-berlin-act-1885
locator: toc
url: https://archive.org/download/mapofafricabytre02hert/mapofafricabytre02hert_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: the Act's own enumeration of the six documents it combines; Hertslet's bracketed running head and footnote marks dropped

Freedom of Trade in Basin of the Congo , &c.

1. A Declaration relative to freedom of trade in the basin of the
Congo, its embouchures and circumjacent regions, with other provisions connected therewith. (See p. 471.)

Slave Trade hy Sea or Land.

2. A Declaration relative to the slave trade, and the operations by
sea or land which furnish slaves to that trade. (See p. 474.)

Neutrality of Territories comprised in the Conventional Basin of the

Congo.

3. A Declaration relative to the neutrality of the territories comprised in the Conventional basin of the Congo. (See p. 474.)

Navigation of the Congo , &c.

4. An Act of Navigation for the Congo, which, while having regard
to local circumstances, extends to this river, its affluents, and the
waters in its system (“ eaux qui leur sont assimilees ”), the general
principles enunciated in Articles CVIII to CXYI of the Final Act of
the Congress of Vienna,* and intended to regulate, as between the
Signatory Powers of that Act, the free navigation of the waterways
separating or traversing several States — these said principles having
since then been applied by agreement to certain rivers of Europe and
America, but especially to the Danube with the modifications stipulated
by the Treaties of Paris (1856) f of Berlin (1878) J and of London
(1871 and 1883).§ (See p. 475.)

Navigation of the Niger.

5. An Act of Navigation for the Niger, which, while likewise
having regard to local circumstances, extends to this river and its
affluents the same principles as set forth in Articles CVIII to CXVI,
of the Final Act of the Congress of Vienna. (See p. 481.)

Future Occupations on the Coast of Africa.

6. A Declaration introducing into international relations certain
uniform rules with reference to future occupations on the coast of the
African Continent. (See p. 484.)

And deeming it expedient that all these several documents should
