source: src-morel-1906
locator: p46-47
url: https://archive.org/download/redrubberstoryof00more_0/redrubberstoryof00more_0_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: Morel's summary and quotation of the missionary Sjoblom's statements; the page number and running head are dropped

sunset. The people had never seen a white man and had
returned from their hunt for rubber. As he was speaking to
them, a soldier rushed in among the crowd, and seized an old
man guilty of having been fishing in the river instead of gathering
rubber ; shoots him before Sjoblom’s eyes. Right hand cut off.
People flee out of the town. “All except the old chiefs are
forced to go away and work rubber.” The sentries are “ from the
wildest tribes.” “ When they get to this work they are many times
worse. They are really small kings in the towns and often kill
the people for the sake of the rubber. If the rubber does not
reach the full amount required the sentries attack the natives.
They kill some and bring the hands to the Commissioner. Others
are brought to the Commissioner as prisoners. Hundreds are
constantly taken down in large steamers.” . “ From this

village I went on to another where I met a soldier who pointed
to a basket, and said to me, ‘ Look, I have only two hands.’ He
meant there were not enough to make up for the rubber he had
not brought.’ He had several prisoners tied to trees. When I

came back, some of the villages were in an uproar. . . . When
I reached the river I turned and saw that the people had large
hammocks in which they were gathering the rubber to be taken
to the Commissioner. I also saw smoked hands, and the
prisoners waiting to be taken to the Commissioner. This is only
one of the places in which these practices occur. There is a
small island in a stream at Lake Mantumba.' The people had
