source: src-bluebook-1918
locator: p59
url: https://archive.org/download/b32172266/b32172266_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: the report's own paragraph on von Trotha, and Gottlob Kamatoto's affidavit

too lenient, was superseded by von Trotha. This new commander was noted in
Berlin for his merciless severity in dealing with natives. In the Chinese Boxer
rebellion he had e¢arried out his Imperial master’s instructions to the letter; and
no more worthy son of Attila could have been selected for the work in hand. He
had just suppressed the Arab rebellion in German Hast Africa by bathing that
country in the blood of thousands and thousands of its inhabitants, men, women
and children; and his butchery there ended, he was ordered by Wilhelm II. to
proceed to German South-West Africa and deal with the rebel natives. Von Trotha
was indifferent as to the means by which his objects should be attained... Treachery
and breaches. of faith were to him admissible. No doubt the reason and excuse
advanced was as usual the inferior kultur-position of the natives. Shortly after
he took command the Hereros were given to understand that reasonable terms of
peace might be granted if their leaders came in and treated.. The subtle German
. felt that it would be easier to dispose of the masses, once their best leaders were
gone. In the meantime von Trotha was drawing his cordon of troops into position
and preparing for the final massacre. Let us read in the words of two Herero eyewitnesses the manner in which von Trotha initiated his campaign.

Gottlob Kamatoto (who was a servant to one of the officers in the field) states
on oath :—

I accompanied the troops to Ombakaha above Gobabis and near Epikiro
intheSandveld. Ata farm called Otjihaenena the Germans sent out messages
to the Hereros that the war was now over and they were to come in and make
peace. As a result of this message seven Herero leaders came into the German
camp to discuss peace terms. As soon as they came in they were asked where
Samuel Maherero the chief was. They said he had gone towards the desert
on his way to British Bechuanaland. That evening at sunset,the seven
peace envoys were caught and tied with ropes. They were led aside and
shot. Before being shot they protested bitterly; but seeing that they were
doomed they accepted their fate.

Relating another instance, the well-known story of German treachery at
Ombakaha, Gerard Kamaheke (at present Herero headman at Windhuk and a
