source: src-bluebook-1918
locator: p102-103
url: https://archive.org/download/b32172266/b32172266_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: sliced from the scan's OCR text layer as the Internet Archive serves it; line-break hyphenation rejoined and runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed; OCR misreadings are left as the layer prints them
note: von Lindequist's amnesty proclamation of 1 December 1905 as the report reproduces it, with the report's framing sentences; the page number is dropped

It will be interesting to reproduce the famous Amnesty Proclamation of von
Lindequist. .It is a document which speaks tellingly of what the treatment of
Hereros had been prior to its publication. |

When one considers the fate and treatment of these unfortunates who, ‘ like
broomsticks,” and so thin that ‘one could see through their bones,” came in and
surrendered to German “mercy,” it seems doubtful, in view of the aforegoing
statements, whether they would not have been as well off if they had remained to
perish of starvation in the bush.

The Proclamation, dated 1st December 1905, reads as follows :—

Hereros! His Majesty the Emperor of Germany, the high Lord Protector
of this Land, has graciously nominated me Governor of this Land a few days

after General von Trotha, who commanded the German troops against you,
returned to Germany. His departure means that the war will now cease.

Hereros! You know me! Formerly I was for five years in this land
as Imperial Judge, and, as Assessor and Councillor, the representative of
Governor Leutwein in the days when Manasse of Omaruru and Kambazembi
of Waterberg, who were always loyal supporters of mine, still lived.

It is my desire that the Rebellion which your Chiefs and Headmen (and
the children who followed them) so wickedly began and which has desolated
the land should now come to an end, so that Peace and Order may again rule.
I therefore call upon the Hereros who still are wandering about the veld and
in the mountains and who nourish themselves by eating wild roots and by
theft. Come and lay down your arms, Hereros! Thousands of your fellow
tribesmen have already surrendered and are being clothed and fed by the
Government. I have taken every precaution to ensure that you will be
justly treated. That I also personally guarantee to you. Further, it is
ordained that from 20th December onwards, that is three weeks from to-day,
no Herero habitations will be searched after and taken, as I wish to give you
time personally to come in peacefully to me and surrender yourselves. Come
to Omburo and Otjihaenena! Your Missionaries will be sent there by me.
They will also take provisions with them, so that your first and great hunger
may be appeased. Some small stock will also be left for provisional use of
your wives and children in so far as you still possess such for their support.
Those who are strong and can work will, when they work with exceptional
diligence, receive a small wage. No European soldiers will be stationed at
Omburo and Otjihaenena, so that you need not have fear and imagine that
further shooting will take place. The sooner you come in and surrender your
arms, the sooner can the question of amelioration of the present lot of your
captive fellow tribesmen be considered and their freedom later again given to
them. If Omburo and Otjihaenena are too far away, anyone may hand in
the arms at any Military Post and surrender there. The soldiers at those
stations will not shoot either. In addition, the soldiers escorting the transport
and travelling through the land will not shoot at you as long as you attempt
nothing hostile towards them. Therefore do not be afraid of them when you
see them. So come quickly in Hereros, before it is too late. In Namaland
also there will soon be quiet, as Hendrik Witbooi has been killed by a German
bullet and Samuel Isaac has surrendered and is in our hands.

. On. this Proclamation the surviving Hereros surrendered, and thousands of them
then met the fate already depicted at Luderitzbucht and Swakopmund and in the
Railway Concentration Labour Camps.
