source: src-khosla-1949
locator: p298
url: https://archive.org/download/stern-reckoning/Stern%20Reckoning_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: the OCR layer's 'a>n\erted' for 'converted' and '^he' for 'the' are kept as printed; the layer's soft hyphens are rejoined; the passage runs to the foot of the page, whose footnote (marked with an asterisk) gives the village counts, and the page's last words before the footnote are 'incidents not', which continue on page 299

It is not possible to make an accurate estimate of the total loss of life or the extent of damage to property caused by these riots. Figures computed on the population basis must, of necessity, prove extremely misleading. The census returns of 1941 were not accurate even at the time they were compiled. They became hopelessly wrong, at the end of six years, when a general increase in population and local movements made it impossible to determine, with any degree of accuracy, how many non-Muslims were living in West Punjab, the North-West Frontier Province and Sind. Nor is it possible to know the total number of Hindu and Sikh refugees who later arrived in India. Rough estimates of the total number of refugees, prepared for purposes of rehabilitation and allotment to the various provinces, do not give a true picture; and the total number of non-Muslims killed or a>n\erted cannot be calculated by substracting the number of refugees in India from the number of non-Muslims residing in the area which now comprises Pakistan, for the simple reason that both numbers will be grossly inaccurate. Figures based on ^he statements of refugee eye-witnesses are a surer guide though even these can, at best, be only approximate. The Fact? Finding Organization examined nearly fifteen thousand witnesses and they bear testimony to the murder of fifty thousand non-Muslims. The incidents deposed to by these witnesses, however, represent only a fraction of the total devastation caused. Thousands of villages where riots are known to have taken place do not figure in the material collected by the Organization.* and no account has been taken of incidents not

* Out of a total ol 19.914 villages in West Punjab only 2,094 are covered by the evidence collected by the Fact Finding Organization. The figures for the North-W^st Frontier Province arc 2,826 and 362 respectively, and for Bhawalpur 2.376 and 216 respectively.
