source: src-nl-wht-19720623
locator: p3
url: https://www.nixonlibrary.gov/sites/default/files/forresearchers/find/tapes/watergate/trial/exhibit_01.pdf
read: 2026-10-09
note: the Nixon Library's electronic copy of the typewritten transcript prepared for the Watergate trials, line breaks folded to spaces; speaker labels, ellipses, the dashes and the hyphens the copy prints at a line end ('investi- gation') are kept as printed; the Library warns that the electronic versions 'may not be identical in every respect to the original typewritten transcripts'
note: printed page 3, which the PDF carries over its first two pages; the page's first line is lower-case as printed

HALDEMAN: okay -that's fine. Now, on the investi- gation, you know, the Democratic break-in thing, we're back to the-in the, the problem area because the FBI is not under control, because Gray doesn't exactly know how to control them, and they have, their investigation is now leading into some productive areas, because they've been able to trace the money, not through the money itself, but through the bank, you know, sources - the banker himself. And, and it goes in some directions we don't want it to go. Ah, also there have been some things, like an informant came in off the street to the FBI in Miami, who was a photographer or has a friend who is a photographer who developed some films through this guy, Barker, and the films had pictures of Democratic National Committee letter head documents and things. So I guess, so it's things like that that are gonna, that are filtering in. Mitchell came up with yesterday, and John Dean analyzed very carefully last night and concludes, concurs now with Mitchell's recommendation that the only way to solve this, and we're set up beautifully to do it, ah, in that and that...the only network that paid any attention to it last night was NBC...they did a massive story on the Cuban... PRESIDENT: That's right. HALDEMAN: thing. PRESIDENT: Right. HALDEMAN: That the way to handle this now is for us to have Walters call Pat Gray and just say, "Stay the hell out of this...this is ah, business here we don't want you to go any further on it." That's not an unusual development,...
