source: src-hjc-report-1974
locator: secvotes
url: https://archive.org/details/impeachmentofric0000unit
read: 2026-10-09
note: the Internet Archive's OCR text of the scanned volume (the item's _djvu.txt), line breaks folded to spaces; OCR misreadings and line-end hyphens (including the '¬' the OCR prints for one) are kept as printed
note: the report's account of the votes, with the running head 'IMPEACHMENT OF RICHARD M. NIXON 17' kept where the OCR prints it

On July 27, the Committee agreed to the amendment in the nature of a substitute for Article I by a vote of 27 to 11. The Committee then adopted Article I, as amended, by a vote of 27 to 11. Article I, as adopted by the Com¬ mittee charged that President Nixon, using the power of his high office, engaged, personally and through his sub¬ ordinates and agents, in a course of conduct or plan designed to delay, impede, and obstruct the investigation of the unlawful entry into the headquarters of the Demo¬ cratic National Committee in Washington, D.C., for the purpose of securing political intelligence; to cover up, con¬ ceal and protect those responsible; and to conceal the existence and scope of other unlawful covert activities. On July 29, an amendment in the nature of a substitute was offered for Article II of the proposed resolution. After debate, the substitute was agreed to by a vote of 28 to 10. The Committee then adopted Article II, as amended, by a vote of 28 to 10. Article II, as amended, charged that President Nixon, using the power of the office of Presi¬ dent of the United States, repeatedly engaged in conduct which violated the constitutional rights of citizens; IMPEACHMENT OF RICHARD M. NIXON 17 which impaired the due and proper administration of jus¬ tice and the conduct of lawful inquiries, or which con¬ travened the laws governing agencies of the executive branch and the purposes of these agencies. On July 30, an additional article was offered as an amendment to the resolution. After debate, this amend¬ ment was adopted by a vote of 21 to 17 and became Article III.
