source: src-jfkl-khrushchev-19621023
locator: whole
url: https://microsites.jfklibrary.org/cmc/oct23/doc6.html
read: 2026-10-07
note: the JFK Library's web text of the Department of State Division of Language Services translation (LS No. 45989), from the salutation to the signature, line breaks folded to spaces; the dropped words ('internal of the Republic', 'to strengthen of its') are the page's

Mr. President. I have just received your letter, and have also acquainted myself with the text of your speech of October 22 regarding Cuba. I must say frankly that measures indicated in your statement constitute a serious threat to peace and to the security of nations. The United States has openly taken the path of grossly violating the United Nations Charter, path of violating international norms of freedom of navigation on the high seas, the path of aggressive actions both against Cuba and against the Soviet Union. The statement by the Government of the United States of America can only be regarded as undisguised interference in the internal of the Republic of Cuba, the Soviet Union, and other states. The United Nations Charter and international norms give no right to any state to institute in international waters the inspection of vessels bound for the shores of the Republic of Cuba. And naturally, neither can we recognize the right of the United States to establish control over armaments which are necessary for the Republic of Cuba to strengthen of its defense capability. We affirm that the armaments which are in Cuba, regardless of the classification to which they may belong, are intended solely for defensive purposes, in order to secure the Republic of Cuba against the attack of an aggressor. I hope that the United States Government will display wisdom and renounce the actions pursued by you, which may lead to catastrophic consequences for world peace. The viewpoint of the Soviet Government with regard to your statement of October 22 is set forth in statement of the Soviet Government, which is being transmitted to you through your Ambassador at Moscow. [s] N. Khrushchev
