source: src-hansard-lords-19460516
locator: p279
url: https://api.parliament.uk/historic-hansard/lords/1946/may/16/india-statement-by-the-cabinet-mission
read: 2026-09-25
note: p is the Hansard column; HL Deb 16 May 1946 vol 141 cc271-87, the Cabinet Mission's statement as Viscount Addison read it to the Lords
note: sections B and C and the statement's sub-paragraphs (II) to (V), all in column 279

Section B comprises the Punjab, the North West Frontier Province and Sind, with a total representation of 35, composed of 9 General, 22 Muslim and 4 Sikh. Section C, consisting of Bengal and Assam, has a total representation of 70, composed of 34 General representatives and 36 Muslims. To these will be added, in Section A, one representative each of the Chief Commissioners Provinces of Delhi, AjmerMerwara and Coorg, and, in Section B, a representative of British Baluchistan. The combined total, therefore, for British India will be 296. "(II) It is the intention that the States would be given in the final Constituent Assembly appropriate representation which would not, on the basis of the calculation of population adopted for British India, exceed 93; but the method of selection will have to be determined by consultation. The States would in the preliminary stage be represented by a negotiating committee. (III) Representatives thus chosen shall meet at New Delhi as soon as possible. (IV) A preliminary meeting will be held at which the general order of business will be decided, a chairman and other officers elected and an Advisory Committee (see paragraph 20 below) on rights of citizens, minorities and tribal and excluded areas set up. Thereafter the provincial representatives will divide up into three sections shown under A, B and C in the Table of Representation in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph. (V) These sections shall proceed to settle provincial constitutions for the provinces included in each section and shall also decide whether any group constitution shall be set up for those provinces and if so with what provincial subjects the group should deal.
