source: src-aicc-19470615
locator: p109
url: https://archive.org/download/select-documents-on-partition-of-punjab-1947/Select%20Documents%20on%20Partition%20of%20Punjab%20-%201947_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: p is the page of Kirpal Singh (ed.), Select Documents on Partition of Punjab 1947 (2nd ed., 2005), read from the Internet Archive text layer; line breaks are joined and the layer's soft hyphens rejoined
note: Document 62, from the Encyclopaedia of Indian National Congress, vol. 10; the layer's doubled comma, 'announcementof', 'downa' and 'A.ILC.C.' are kept as printed

In view, however,, of the refusal of the Muslim League to accept the plan of May 16, and to participate in the Constituent Assembly, and further, in view of the policy of Congress that ‘it cannot think in terms of compelling the people in any territorial unit to remain in an Indian Union against their declared and established will,’ the A.I.C.C. accepts the proposals embodied in the announcementof June 3, which have laid downa procedure for ascertaining the will of the people concerned. The Congress has consistently upheld that the unity of Indian must be maintained. Ever since its inception more than 60 years ago, the National Congress has laboured for the realization of a free and united India, and millions of our people have suffered in this great cause. Not only the labours and sacrifices of the past two generations, but the long course of India’s history and tradition bear witness to this essential unity. Geography and the mountains and the seas fashioned Indiaas she is,andnohuman agency can change that shape or come in the way of her final destiny. Economic circumstances and the insistent demands of international affairs make the unity of India still more necessary. The picture of India we have learntto cherish will remain in our minds and hearts. The A.1.C.C. earnestly trusts that, when the present passions have subsided, India’s problems will be viewed in their proper perspective and that false doctrine of two nations in India will be discredited and discarded by all. The proposals of June 3, 1947, are likely to lead to the secession of some parts of the country from India. However much this may be regretted, the A.ILC.C. accepts this possibility, in the circumstances now prevailing.
