source: src-nl-hr-2019
locator: sec5
url: https://data.rechtspraak.nl/uitspraken/content?id=ECLI:NL:HR:2019:1284
read: 2026-09-24
note: the English translation the Supreme Court published; paragraph 5.1

5.1 Briefly put, the foregoing entails that the State is liable to a more limited degree than determined by the Court of Appeal. In so far as this case concerns the acts of Dutchbat until 23:00 on 11 July 1995, those acts were performed under the command and control of the UN, without the State exercising effective control in that regard. Those acts cannot be attributed to the State for that reason. The State cannot be held liable for the fact that Dutchbat was unable to prevent Srebrenica from being captured by the Bosnian Serbs. In the period starting from 23:00 on 11 July 1995, after Srebrenica had been conquered and after it was decided to evacuate the Bosnian Muslims who had fled to the mini safe area, the State did have effective control of Dutchbat's conduct. That conduct can be attributed to the State for that reason. The evacuation – which, in hindsight, turned into deportation of the male refugees by the Bosnian Serbs – commenced in the afternoon of Wednesday, 12 July 1995, with Dutchbat's cooperation. From the evening of 12 July 1995 Dutchbat became aware that the male refugees, after being separated from the other refugees by the Bosnian Serbs, ran a real risk of violation of their rights to physical integrity and life by the Bosnian Serbs. The continued cooperation in the evacuation of refugees on Thursday, 13 July 1995, was not wrongful, however. Although Dutchbat knew of the aforementioned realistic danger to the male refugees, Dutchbat discontinuing its cooperation could not have changed this, as the Bosnian Serbs would continue the evacuation. By continuing to cooperate in the evacuation, in any event Dutchbat could prevent women, children and the elderly from being trampled. This is why it was not wrongful for Dutchbat to continue its cooperation in the evacuation. However, the latter is different in respect of the evacuation at the end of the afternoon of 13 July 1995 of the refugees who were inside the compound. Dutchbat failed to offer the male refugees in the compound the choice of staying behind there, even though that was possible. As a result, Dutchbat withheld from these male refugees the chance of escaping from the Bosnian Serbs. That was wrongful. The chance that the male refugees, had they been offered this choice, would have escaped the Bosnian Serbs was small, but not negligible. That chance is estimated at 10%. This is why the liability of the State is limited to 10% of the damage suffered by the surviving relatives of these male refugees.
