source: src-ictr-ruggiu-js
locator: para44
url: https://unictr.irmct.org/sites/unictr.org/files/case-documents/ictr-97-32/trial-judgements/en/000601.pdf
read: 2026-10-07
note: line breaks in the PDF's text layer folded to spaces; nothing else changed
note: the paragraph crosses a page; nothing stands between the two spans but the page break, folded like any other line break

44. On 11 May 2000, the Parties submitted a document entitled "Plea Agreement between Georges Ruggiu and the Office of the Prosecutor", signed by the Prosecutor and Georges Ruggiu and his Defence Counsel. In this document, the accused assumes full responsibility for all the relevant acts alleged in the two counts of the indictment. In particular: (i) The accused admits that he was a journalistic broadcaster for RTLM. He admits that all broadcasts were directed towards rallying the population against the "enemy", the RPF and those who were considered to be allies of the RPF, regardless of their ethnic background. He admits that RTLM broadcasts generally referred to those considered to be RPF allies as RPF "accomplices". The meaning of this term gradually expanded to include the civilian Tutsi population and Hutu politicians opposed to the Interim Government. (ii) The accused states that in the months following his arrival in Rwanda, he noticed changes in the Rwandan political scene. The country was slipping senselessly into further violence against a background of increasing ethnic problems and rifts. (iii) The accused acknowledges that the widespread use of the term "Inyenzi" conferred the de facto meaning of "persons to be killed". Within the context of the civil war in 1994, the term "Inyenzi" became synonymous with the term "Tutsi". The accused acknowledges that the word "Inyenzi", as used in a socio-political context, came to designate the Tutsis as "persons to be killed". He also admits that during one broadcast he said that the 1959 revolution ought to be completed in order to preserve its achievements. (iv) The accused admits that as part of the move to appeal for, or encourage, "civil defence", he made a public broadcast to the population on several occasions to "go to work". The phrase "go to work" is a literal translation of the Rwandan expression that Phocas Habimana, Manager of the RTLM, expressly instructed the accused to use during his broadcasts. With time, this expression came to clearly signify "go fight against members of the RPF and their accomplices." With the passage of time, the expression came to mean, "go kill the Tutsis and Hutu political opponents of the interim government." (v) The accused also admits having broadcast over the RTLM that: • he condemned the attitude of Agathe Uwilingiyimana, the Prime Minister, who was compromising the Rwandan political institutions and, further, demanded that she leave office; • he congratulated the valiant combatants who were engaged in a battle against the "Inyenzi" at Nyamirambo, including civilians, Interahamwe militiamen, members of political parties and military combatants; • there would be a reward offered by the government for any one who killed or captured a white man fighting on the side of the RPF; • he told Karanganwa to "do a good job" and reminded him that the MRND Chairman in Kicukiro wanted to establish a civil defence force; • they were having a"good time"killing the Inyenzi and the population was determined to fight and chase the Inyenzi-Inkotanyi out of the country. He further called on the youth to "work" with the Army; • the civilian population and members of the civil society should remain vigilant, the Inyenzi-Inkotanyi infiltrators should be identified, and all suspicious movements should be reported; • he thanked the civil defence forces and the Rwandan Armed Forces for ensuring the security of the Rwandan people; • the population should be mobilised and the youth should "work" throughout the country with the Army and the government to defend the country. (vi) The accused admits that he made the following statements during some of his broadcasts on the RTLM radio station: • Belgian missiles shot down the President’s plane; • Belgium is responsible for the oppression of the Hutus by the Tutsis; • Belgium is supporting the RPF; • Measures should be taken against Belgium for assassinating President Habyarimana; • Belgians are neo-colonists and should leave Rwanda; • No co-operation should be extended to Belgium; • Belgium should apologize and make reparations for the death of President Habyarimana, for its assistance to the RPF and for all damages; • In Nyamirambo, three Bazungu (whites) were killed within the RPF ranks. They were not just any Bazungu. They were Belgians; • The President’s plane was shot down in Masaka, the security zone controlled by UNAMIR Belgian soldiers; • United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda ("UNAMIR") is collaborating with the RPF, and General Dallaire, the UNAMIR Force Commander is the adviser for RPF; Dallaire must choose either to do his work or to leave; • It is absolutely necessary for the Rwandan Government to order Belgians, and particularly Belgians in UNAMIR, to leave; • Belgian blackmail of Rwanda should stop. (vii) The accused admits that he broadcast discriminatory and threatening remarks over the radio against the political stance adopted by the Belgian government in Rwanda and the behaviour of UNAMIR, especially the Belgian contingent. The accused waged a media war against the Belgians over the RTLM to attack the international policy adopted by the Belgian government towards Rwanda. (viii) The accused admits that between 8 and 13 April 1994, he was informed of large-scale infiltration of RPF members into Gikondo. To alert the RTLM Editorin-chief, Gaspard Gahigi , who lived in Gikondo, he broadcast a warning to the Gikondo population about the presence of the infiltrators. Gaspard Gahigi subsequently explained to the accused that many persons, including women and children, were killed as a result of the broadcaast. (ix) The RTLM broadcast the names of persons such as Faustin Tagiramungu, Prime Minister-designate of the broad-based transitional government formed pursuant to the Arusha Accords, and Lando Ndasinga, Minister of Social Affairs, and accused them of being RPF accomplices. Lando Ndasinga was killed on 7 April 1994. The accused admits that during one of the broadcasts, he accused Tagiramungu of being one of those responsible for the assassination of President Habyarimana and six other political luminaries, and then broadcast that the "popular masses were lying in wait" for Tagiramungu. (x) The accused acknowledges that he, like other RTLM broadcasters, intermittently played songs, with the intent of encouraging the population to fight the enemy. One such song is entitled "Naanga Abakwtie", which means, "I do not like the Hutu." (xi) The accused acknowledges that RTLM broadcasts reflected the political ideology and plans of extremist Hutus, particularly members of MRND and the Coalition for the Defence of the Republic ("CDR"). He admits that RTLM broadcasts incited young Rwandans, Interahamwe militiamen and soldiers to engage in armed conflict against the "enemy" and its accomplices and to kill and inflict serious bodily and mental harm on Tutsis and moderate Hutus. (xii) The accused admits that on 1 June 1994, he congratulated the Interahamwe and gendarmes of Gitega and Muhima for capturing a 50 Bromville Mark machine gun, made in the United States of America, from the "enemy". (xiii) The accused admits that RTLM broadcasters, managerial and editorial staff bear full responsibility for the 1994 massacre of Tutsis and Hutu opposition party members.
