source: src-un-dpko-cable-19940111
locator: whole
url: https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB452/docs/doc05.pdf
read: 2026-10-07
note: the PDF's text layer is an OCR of the scanned reply cable as the National Security Archive serves it; it misreads some glyphs ('ll' for '11', 'liAS' for 'WAS', 'UIIAMIR' for 'UNAMIR', 'INTERHAHWE' for 'INTERHAMWE', 'HRND' for 'MRND', '~' for a paragraph number) and carries stray marks from the page edge; nothing is corrected here, line breaks folded to spaces
note: the whole two-page cable as the layer prints it

t.' CNR 06 Pl/2 • OUTGOING CODE CABLE c L 0 J1'l 02 MOST IMMEDIATE TO: BOOH-BOOH/DALLAIRE, FROM: DATE: NUMBER: ANNAN, UNATIONS, 11 January 1994 UNAMIR: 1 QQ ONLY NO DISTRIBUTION ·.-.- SUBJECT: Contacts with Informant • l. We have carefully reviewed the situation in the light of your MIR-79. We cannot agree to the operation contemplated in paragraph 7 of your cable, as it clearly goes beyond the mandate entrusted to UNAMIR under resolution 872 (1993). 2. However, on the assumption that you are convinced that the information provided by the informant is absolutely reliable, we request you to undertake the initiatives described in the following paragraphs. 3. SRSG and FC should request urgent meeting with the President. At that meeting you should inform the President that you have received apparently reliable information concerning the activities of the Interhamwe militia which represent a clear threat to the peace process. You should inform him that these activities include the training and deployment of subversive groups in Kigali as well as the storage and distribution of weapons to these groups. • 4. You should inform him that these activities constitute a clear violation of the provisions of the Arusha peace agreement and of the Kigali weapons-secure area. You should assume that he is ~ aware of these activities, but insist that he must immediately look into the situation, take the necessary action to WM002253 CJ!R 06 P2/2 ensure that these subversive activities are immediately discontinued and inform you within 48 hours of the measures taken in this regard, including the recovery of the arms which have been distributed. l 00 01 7C3 5. You should advise the President that, if any violence occurs in Kigali, you would have to immediately bring to the attention of the Security Council the information you have received on the activities of the militia, undertake investigations to determine who is responsible and make appropriate recommendations to the Security Council. 6. Before meeting with the President you should inform the Ambassadors of Belgium, France and the United States of your intentions and suggest to them that they may wish to consider making a similar demarche. 7. For security considerations, we leave it to your discretion to decide whether to inform the PM(D) of your plans before or after the meeting with the President. When you meet with the PM(D), you should explain to him the limits of your mandate. You should also assure him that, while the mandate of UNAMIR does not allow you to extend protection to the informant, his identity and your contacts with him will not be repeat not be revealed. B. If you have major problems with the guidance provided above, you may consult us further. We wish to stress, however, that the overriding consideration is the need to avoid entering into a course of action that might lead to the use of force and unanticipated repercussions. Regards. WM002254
