source: src-us-dos-briefing-19940610
locator: secrwanda
url: https://web.archive.org/web/20000126075448/http://dosfan.lib.uic.edu:80/ERC/briefing/daily_briefings/1994/9406/940610db.html
read: 2026-10-07
note: sliced from the page's HTML rendered to text; runs of spaces collapsed, nothing else changed
note: the Rwanda passage of the transcript from its first question; the transcript spells the briefer 'Shelly'

Q How would you describe the events taking place in Rwanda? MS. SHELLY: Based on the evidence we have seen from observations on the ground, we have every reason to believe that acts of genocide have occurred in Rwanda. Q What's the difference between "acts of genocide" and "genocide?" MS. SHELLY: As you know, there is a legal definition of this. There has been a lot of discussion about how the definition applies under the definition of "genocide" contained in the 1948 convention. If you're looking at that for your determination about genocide, clearly, not all of the killings that have taken place in Rwanda are killings to which you might apply that label. Some of the difficulties over actually arriving at a definition of "genocide" and formulations on genocide are the reasons why -- particularly, in late May, the U.N. Human Rights Commission, with the very strong support by the United States, appointed a Special Rapporteur for Rwanda, specifically to compile the information on possible violations of human rights and on acts which constitute breaches of international humanitarian law and crimes against humanity, including acts of genocide. His preliminary report, which is due later this month, will provide the additional information about the human rights violations -- the types, and presumably how they might be characterized -- and that is something that we have to wait for. As to the distinctions between the words, we're trying to call. What we have seen so far, as best as we can, and based, again, on the evidence, we have every reason to believe that acts of genocide have occurred. Q How many acts of genocide does it take to make genocide? MS. SHELLY: Alan, that's just not a question that I'm in a position to answer.
