source: src-phr-1918-09-13
locator: p1540
url: https://archive.org/download/jstor-4574883/4574883_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: line-break hyphenation in the text layer rejoined and line breaks collapsed to spaces; nothing else changed
note: the text layer prints the Surgeon General's name as Rupert Blve and arc for are; stored as printed

On account of a reported pandemic of influenza in various European countries, officers in charge of national quarantine stations have been advised to exercise special care with respect to vessels on which this disease has appeared. The following circular has been issued: Medical Officers in Charge, United States Quarantine Stations. Sirs: You arc especially cautioned to be on the alert in the inspection of vessels from European ports so as to detect any cases of the so-called Spanish influenza. If any such disease is discovered, vessels should not bo released from quarantine until after the local health authorities have been notified in accordance with paragraph 68, United States Quarantine Regulations. Owing to disordered conditions in European countries, the bureau has no authoritative information as to the nature of the disease or its prevalence. It appears, however, to be an infection due to the B. influenza with predilection to lung involvement. If any such cases are discovered upon arrival of a vessel, they should be reported to the local health authorities and the necessary cooperation extended, including fumigation of living quarters with sulphur dioxide, letting personal effects remain in compartments during the fumigation. This circular does not contemplate consideration of cases of ordinary pneumonia or respiratory infections, but only those infections involving a considerable number of the crew and which appear to be highly communicable and suggestive of epidemic influenza. Respectfully, Rupert Blve, Surgeon General. Recently a steamship arrived at one of the southern ports from a port of Great Britain with history of an outbreak of epidemic influenza in the crew. The master of the vessel reported very shortly after his arrival at Great Britain that the entire crew had sickened with the infection, the symptoms being high fever, cough, coryza, and more or less prostration. Upon arrival of the vessel at a port of the United States two of the crew were still suffering from the 1541 September 13, 191S. disease and were isolated in the quarantine hospital, the vessel was disinfected, and other appropriate measures were taken to prevent the introduction of the disease. The disease has been reported as being observed at quarantine in two ports on the Pacific coast. In both instances there were several cases of pneumonia, possibly due to B. influenza although not stated to be. Epidemic influenza has. been reported in several countries in Europe during the summer -of 1918, more especially in Spain. According to press dispatches, 8,000,000 persons have suffered from the disease in that country. Most of the cases reported to the Public Health Service have been from France, England, Norway, and Switzerland, although a mild form has been reported in Canton, China. It has appeared at Prince Edward Island, Canada, and in the Island of Guadeloupe in the West Indies, probably an extension from European ports.
