source: src-phr-1919-07-25
locator: p1624
url: https://archive.org/download/jstor-4575250/4575250_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: line-break hyphenation in the text layer rejoined and line breaks collapsed to spaces; nothing else changed

In June, 1918, unusual causes of sickness began to be observed in India. At Bombay disabling sickness was noted, occurring chiefly among employees and mill workers. Sporadic cases were observed at Calcutta about the middle of June and at Madras about the end of that month. Previous infection from influenza in India appears to be indicated by the reported occurrence of a disease resembling influenza in the district of Tana, presidency of Bombay, early in the year 1918. It was noted, however, that the first ascertained cases of influenza at Bombay city occurred on a transport arrived in May from Mesopotamia. These cases occurred on the vessel at dock. There had been no occurrence of the disease en route to Bombay, and the vessel had complete communication with the city of Bombay. Influenza occurred at Karachi, and in July the infection appeared to be generally diffused in the Punjab and the United Provinces. Reports of the appearance of the epidemic among troops were received in July from Maymyo, Karachi, Lansdowne, Jubbelpore, Abottabad, Kwandwa, Fort Lockhart, Quetta, Dehra, Dun, Muttra, and Chakrata. In spite of the dissemination of the disease during the months of July and August, no appreciable augmentation of mortality was observed, but toward the end of September mortality began to rise alarmingly at Bombay and on October 6 attained the total of 768 deaths. A second virulent epidemic prevalence was later observed in other parts of India. The epidemic reached its greatest intensity in the central, northern, and western parts of the Indian Empire. In comparison with these regions the Provinces of Bengal, Burma, Bihar and Orissa, Madras, and Assam were only slightly attacked. There was a gradual diminution of intensity toward the east.
