source: src-phr-1918-12-27
locator: p2306
url: https://archive.org/download/jstor-4574973/4574973_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: line-break hyphenation in the text layer rejoined and line breaks collapsed to spaces; nothing else changed

Were there any necessity for demonstrating the utter inadequacy and lack of uniformity of morbidity reporting in the United States, such a demonstration would be fully available in the experience afforded during the present epidemic. The shortcomings of morbidity statistics already are so well known that it is unnecessary to refer to them in detail. Their chief fault — incompleteness— was immeasurably increased by the unusual circumstances that prevailed. Among these circumstances were the magnitude of the epidemic in a large number of localities, the congestion of cases at and near the peak of the epidemic, the tendency to cease reporting toward the end of the epidemic, the breakdown of the more or less elaborate S3^stem of individual card reports which called for unessential as well as essential data, and the depletion of the reporting personnel — the practicing physicians — by service in the armed forces and by the disease itself. In addition to these unusual conditions was the fact that in practically no State or locality had influenza been a reportable disease prior to the 1918 epidemic, and that in perhaps a very large proportion of localities it was not made a reportable disease until the epidemic was well under way. In studying the prevalence of influenza, therefore, we are confronted with serious obstacles, among which may be mentioned the following:. (1) In practically no locality can it bo assumed that complete reports of cases were made; a true prevalence rate can not be computed. (2) Since the disease was not reported with any degree of comparable completeness in different localities, comparisons of localities for prevalence obviously are impossible. (3) For the same reasons, statements of the incidence according to sex, age, or of any other condition with which it might be desirable to attempt correlations are not feasible, except in very general terms. (4) The chronology of the epidemic in perhaps the great majority of localities has not been recorded, and if recorded is subject to serious errors with respect to the beginning of the epidemic and the true height of the peak. (5) Fatality rates manifestly can not be ascertained. With the exception of data obtained from special field studies and from limited areas ami population groups, we must look to mortality reports for our main statistics of the epidemic.
