source: src-moh-1920
locator: secbrazil
url: https://archive.org/download/pandemic-of-influenza-1918-1919_UK-MinistryofHealth_HMSO-1920/PandemicofInfluenzaHMSO_entire_book_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: line-break hyphenation in the text layer rejoined and line breaks collapsed to spaces; nothing else changed

Early in October 1918 influenza began to be epidemic in Rio de Janeiro and spread rapidly over the whole city, attacking, it was said, more than half of the total inhabitants. The precise source from which Rio de Janeiro was infected has not yet been stated. In the early days of the epidemic, influenza was known to have caused the death of 20 of the crew of a United States ship of war lying in the harbour. Although it was at first announced by the authorities that the type of the epidemic malady in the city was mild, many deaths occurred and a panic developed among the inhabitants. The sanitary administration broke down, business was at a standstill, the food supplies ran short, and what articles were available were sold at such exorbitant prices as to place them beyond the reach of the poorer classes. Many shops were closed and the streets were almost deserted. Restaurants and places of amusement also closed their doors. Owing to the amount of illness among the men, the railway services were greatly reduced, and communication by telegraph or telephone was almost suspended for the same reason, the operators being Buenos Aires Herald, 13th December 1919. 339 largely on the sick list. At some of the public relief stations no medical stores were available and medical assistance in many instances could not be obtained. The druggists raised their prices enormously, making such drugs as quinine quite unobtainable by the lower classes. Some of the newspapers added to the panic by printing alarming accounts of the ravages of the epidemic, and attacked with bitterness the sanitary authorities of the city, an attitude that led to the resignation of the Director of Public Health.
