source: src-sancom-1918
locator: p59
url: https://archive.org/download/b31492551/b31492551_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: line-break hyphenation in the text layer rejoined and line breaks collapsed to spaces; nothing else changed

The mortality charts give no indication of the date of the introduction cr origin of infection. In Bombay city cases of influenza were diagnosed clinically during the 1st week of June among the police, and many cases had been reported among the British troops stationed in Bombay during the early portion of the year. Such sporadic cases heralded the onset of the first epidemic in other parts of India, for instance, it is stated that some cases occurred in Calcutta early in June. Influenza was also diagnosed clinically among the British troops in Bombay during the whole of 1917. It is unfortunate that the clinical diagnosis of influenza in the period when the disease is not epidemic depends a good deal on the idiosincracy of the observer. The possibility of influenza having been endemic in India, as it is in most countries, must be remembered. This is a very important point, for, if there were no endemic foci of infection in India, infection must have been introduced from without. It may be a coincidence, but the fact remains that a ship arrived in Bombay towards the end of May. After arrival a few cases of a disease, diagnosed at the time as sandfly fever, were found. It is very probable that these men were really suffering from mild influenza. As, however, the symptoms were noticed first some hours after the arrival of the ship it is not certain when the sufferers acquired infection. On the 15th June another ship arrived in which many cases of influenza had occurred during the voyage. But for the fact that influenza of a mild type was undoubtedly present in Bombay Wore the arrival of this ship, this latter incident would have been blamed for the introduction of infection into India. The passengers by this ship may possibly have assisted in disseminating infection through India ; but, of this there is no evidence. The collection of such evidence for influenza may not be easy in any country and is particularly difficult in India. The first cases in Karachi were noticed among a batch of no patients who were admitted to hospital after arrival on an ambulance transport from Basra. The transport arrived on the 20th, and the cases were found on the 22nd, that is, some hours after admission to hospital. Basra was said to be free from infection when the ship left, and there is no evidence of an outbreak during the voyage. The case for the introduction of infection by shipping must be left as unproven.
