source: src-edwards-1797
locator: p75-76
url: https://archive.org/download/historicalsurvey00edwa/historicalsurvey00edwa_djvu.txt
read: 2026-09-25
note: pages 75 to 76 of the 1797 edition: the computation within two months, and footnote (c) on the executions of 28 September 1791; footnote (h) and the page header removed
note: the free copy is the scan's OCR text layer, held as the layer prints it, long s read as f and other misreadings included
note: line-break hyphenation in the scan's text layer rejoined; nothing else changed

lence. It was computed that, within two months after the revolt firfl began, upwards of two thoufoiid white perfons, of all conditions and ages, had been mallacrcd ; — that one hundred and eighty fugar plantations, and aboi.it nine iKindred coffee,, cotton, and indigo fettlements had been deftroyed (the buildings thereofl being confumed by fire), and one thouland two hundred chriftian faniiHes reduced from opulence, to fuch a ftate of mifery as to depend akogether for their clothing and fuilenance on pubUck and private charity. Of the infurgents. it was reckoned that upwards of ten thoufand had perhhed by the fword or by famine ; and fome hundreds by the hands of the executioner j — many of them, I grieve to fay, under the torture of the wheel ;— a lyrtem •of revenge and retaliation, which no enormities of favage life could juftify or excufe (c). (c) Two of thefe unhappy men fuffered in this manner under the window of the author's lodo-inp-s, and in his prefence, at Cape Francois, on Thurfday the 28th cf September 1791- They were broken on two pieces of timber placed crofswife. One of them expired on receiving the third ftroke on his flomach, each of his legs and arms having been firft broken in two places; the iirft three blows he bore without a groan. The other had a harder fate. When the executioner, after ' breaking his legs and arms, lifted up the inflrument to give the finifhing flroke on thebreaft, and which (by putting the criminal out of hif pain) is called le coup de greue, the mob, with the ferocioufnefs of cannibals, called out arretez! (ftop) and compelled him to leave his work unfinifhed. In that condition, the miferable wretch, with his broken limbs doubled up, was put on a cart-wheel, which was placed horizontally, one end of the axle-tree being driven into the earth. He feemed perfeflly fenfible, but uttered not a groan. At the end of forty minutes, fome Englifh feamen, who were fpedtators of the tragedy, ftrangled him in_ mercy.
