source: src-pp-part-i
locator: secletters
url: https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-I.pdf
read: 2026-10-09
note: NARA's 2011 scan of the Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force, its text layer (the scan's own OCR), line breaks folded to spaces; OCR misreadings ('l east', 'vrere'), line-end hyphens, the 'TOP SECRET - Sensitive' running heads and the 'Declassified per Executive Order 13526' stamp are kept where the text layer prints them
note: Part I; 'HOTS' and 'HO's' are the text layer's readings of 'Ho's'

There remains, however, the matter of HOTS direct appeals for U.S. intervention in Vietnam, at which even a Leninist might have scrupled. These occurred (late 1945, early 1946) just after France has reasserted itself militarily in South Vietnam, while Chinese Nationalist warlords vrere ensconced in Hanoi, and before the 6 March 1946 Accord i-rith Franc'e. Desperately, Ho turned to the United States, among other pOl.,ers, asking for "immediate interference" in Vietnam. There were, at l east, eight communications from Ho to the President of the United States, or to the Secretary of State, from October, 1945, to February, 191~6. Ho had conveyed earlier, in August and September, ' 1945, via O.S.S. channels, proposals that Vietnam be accorded lIthe same statusas the Philippines,!! for an undetermined period of tutelage pre- liminary to independence. Hith the outbreak of hostilities in South Vietnam, September-October 1945, he added formal requests for U.S. and U.N. intervention against French aggression, citing the Atlantic Charter, the U.N. Charter, and a foreign policy address of President Truman in October, 1945, endorsing national self-determination. Ho's last direct t communication with the U.S. was in September, 1946, when he visited the U.S. Ambassador in Paris to ask vaguely for U.S. assistance in obtaining independence for Vietnam Hithin the French Union. r There is no record of U.S. reply to any of HO's appeals for aid.
