source: src-statute-78-384
locator: secresolution
url: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-78/pdf/STATUTE-78-Pg384.pdf
read: 2026-10-09
note: the Government Publishing Office's PDF of United States Statutes at Large, volume 78, page 384, its text layer; marginal notes ('Southeast Asia. 59 Stat. 1031. 6 UST 81.') and OCR readings ('rj^j', 'hy', '(^hief', 'assembled^') are kept as printed

Public Law 88-408 JOINT RESOLUTION August 10, 1964 [H. J. Res. 1145] rj^j promote the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast Asia. Southeast Asia. 59 Stat. 1031. 6 UST 81. Whereas naval units of the Communist regime in Vietnam, in viola- tion of the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law, have deliberately and repeatedly attacked United States naval vessels lawfully present in international waters, and have thereby created a serious threat to international peace; and Whereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic cam- paign of aggression that the Communist regime in North Vietnam has been waging against its neighbors and the nations joined with them in the collective defense of their freedom; and Whereas the United States is assisting the peoples of southeast Asia to protect their freedom and has no territorial, military or political ambitions in that area, but desires only that these peoples should be left in peace to work out their own destinies in their own way : Now, therefore, be it Resolved hy the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled^ That the Congress approves and supports the determination of the President, as Commander in (^hief, to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression. SEC. 2. The United States regards as vital to its national interest and to world peace the maintenance of international peace and security in southeast Asia. Consonant with the Constitution of the United States and the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with its obligations under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is, therefore, prepared, as the President determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom. SEC. 3. This resolution shall expire when the President shall de- termine that the peace and security of the area is reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the United Nations or otherwise, except that it may be terminated earlier by concurrent reso- lution of the Congress. Approved August 10, 1964.
