source: src-frus-1964-68-v27-d53
locator: secmess
url: https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v27/d53
read: 2026-10-09
note: the Office of the Historian's web text of FRUS 1964-1968, volume XXVII, document 53; the site prints the apostrophe as U+02BC (modifier letter apostrophe), which is written here as U+2019 so that a quotation can be matched; that is the only change beyond whitespace; the bracketed sentence is FRUS's

53. Telephone Conversation Between President Johnson and the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1 Washington, May 27, 1964, 11:24 a.m. [Here follows discussion of the Seaborn mission to Hanoi and plans for Ambassador Stevenson to meet with the President.] Johnson: I will tell you the more, I just stayed awake last night thinking of this thing, and the more that I think of it I don’t know what in the hell, it looks like to me that we’re getting into another Korea. It just worries the hell out of me. I don’t see what we can ever hope to get out of there with once we’re committed. I believe the Chinese Communists are coming into it. I don’t think that we can fight them 10,000 miles away from home and ever get anywhere in that area. I don’t think it’s worth fighting for and I don’t think we can get out. And it’s just the biggest damn mess that I ever saw. Bundy: It is an awful mess. Johnson: And we just got to think about it. I’m looking at this Sergeant of mine this morning and he’s got 6 little old kids over there, and he’s getting out my things, and bringing me in my night reading, and all that kind of stuff, and I just thought about ordering all those kids in there. And what in the hell am I ordering them out there for? What in the hell is Vietnam worth to me? What is Laos worth to me? What is it worth to this country? We’ve got a treaty but hell, everybody else has got a treaty out there, and they’re not doing a thing about it. Bundy: Yeah, yeah. Johnson: Of course, if you start running from the Communists, they may just chase you right into your own kitchen.
