source: src-osti-nagasaki
locator: sec1
url: https://www.osti.gov/opennet/manhattan-project-history/Events/1945/nagasaki.htm
read: 2026-10-05
note: line breaks are the page's; '(right)' is the page's figure reference

At 3:47 a.m. on August 9, 1945, a
B-29 named Bock's Car lifted off from Tinian and
headed toward the primary target: Kokura Arsenal, a
massive collection of war industries adjacent to the city
of Kokura.

From this point on, few things went according to
plan. The aircraft commander, Major Charles W.
Sweeney, ordered the arming of the bomb only ten minutes
after take-off so that the aircraft could be pressurized
and climb above the lightning and squalls that menaced the
flight all the way to Japan. (A journalist, William
L. Laurence of the New York Times , on an
escorting aircraft saw some "St. Elmo's fire"
glowing on the edges of the aircraft and worried that the
static electricity might detonate the bomb.) Sweeney
then discovered that due to a minor malfunction he would
not be able to access his reserve fuel. The aircraft
next had to orbit over Yaku-shima off the south coast of
Japan for almost an hour in order to rendezvous with its
two escort B-29s, one of which never did arrive. The
weather had been reported satisfactory earlier in the day
over Kokura Arsenal, but by the time the B-29 finally
arrived there, the target was obscured by smoke and
haze. Two more passes over the target still produced
no sightings of the aiming point. As an aircraft
crewman, Jacob Beser, later recalled, Japanese fighters
and bursts of antiaircraft fire were by this time starting
to make things "a little hairy." Kokura no
longer appeared to be an option, and there was only enough
fuel on board to return to the secondary airfield on
Okinawa, making one hurried pass as they went over their
secondary target, the
city of Nagasaki . As Beser later
put it, "there was no sense dragging the bomb home or
dropping it in the ocean."

As it turned out, cloud cover obscured Nagasaki as
well. Sweeney reluctantly approved a much less
accurate radar approach on the target. At the last
moment the bombardier, Captain Kermit K. Beahan, caught a
brief glimpse of the city's stadium through the clouds and
dropped the bomb. At 11:02 a.m., at an altitude of
1,650 feet, Fat Man (right) exploded over
Nagasaki. The yield of the
explosion was later estimated at 21 kilotons, 40 percent
greater than that of the
Hiroshima bomb .
